skills/patientsim/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: healthsim-patientsim
description: "Generate realistic clinical patient data including demographics, encounters, diagnoses, medications, labs, and vitals. Use when user requests: (1) patient records or clinical data, (2) EMR test data, (3) specific clinical scenarios like diabetes or heart failure, (4) HL7v2 or FHIR patient resources."
---

# PatientSim - Clinical Patient Data Generation

## For Claude

Use this skill when the user requests clinical patient data, EMR/EHR test data, or medical records. This is the primary skill for generating realistic synthetic patients with complete clinical histories.

**When to apply this skill:**

- User mentions patients, clinical data, or medical records
- User requests EMR or EHR test data
- User specifies clinical scenarios (diabetes, heart failure, oncology, etc.)
- User asks for HL7v2 messages, FHIR resources, or C-CDA documents
- User needs encounters, diagnoses, medications, labs, or vitals

**Key capabilities:**

- Generate patients with realistic demographics and identifiers
- Create encounters across care settings (inpatient, outpatient, ED, observation)
- Apply clinical scenarios from specialized skills (diabetes, oncology, etc.)
- Produce appropriately coded data (ICD-10, CPT, LOINC, RxNorm)
- Transform output to healthcare standards (FHIR R4, HL7v2, C-CDA)

For specific clinical scenarios, load the appropriate scenario skill from the table below.

## Overview

PatientSim generates realistic synthetic clinical data for EMR/EHR testing, including:
- Patient demographics
- Encounters (inpatient, outpatient, emergency, observation)
- Diagnoses (ICD-10-CM)
- Procedures (CPT, ICD-10-PCS)
- Medications (with RxNorm codes)
- Lab results (with LOINC codes)
- Vital signs

## Quick Start

### Simple Patient

**Request:** "Generate a patient"

```json
{
  "mrn": "MRN00000001",
  "name": { "given_name": "John", "family_name": "Smith" },
  "birth_date": "1975-03-15",
  "gender": "M",
  "address": {
    "street_address": "123 Main Street",
    "city": "Springfield",
    "state": "IL",
    "postal_code": "62701"
  }
}
```

### Clinical Scenario

**Request:** "Generate a diabetic patient with complications"

Claude loads [diabetes-management.md](diabetes-management.md) and produces a complete clinical picture.

## Scenario Skills

Load the appropriate scenario based on user request:

| Scenario | Trigger Phrases | File |
|----------|-----------------|------|
| **ADT Workflow** | admission, discharge, transfer, ADT, patient movement | [adt-workflow.md](adt-workflow.md) |
| **Behavioral Health** | depression, anxiety, bipolar, PTSD, mental health, psychiatric, substance use, PHQ-9, GAD-7 | [behavioral-health.md](behavioral-health.md) |
| **Diabetes Management** | diabetes, A1C, glucose, metformin, insulin | [diabetes-management.md](diabetes-management.md) |
| **Heart Failure** | CHF, HFrEF, HFpEF, BNP, ejection fraction | [heart-failure.md](heart-failure.md) |
| **Chronic Kidney Disease** | CKD, eGFR, dialysis, nephropathy | [chronic-kidney-disease.md](chronic-kidney-disease.md) |
| **Sepsis/Acute Care** | sepsis, infection, ICU, critical care | [sepsis-acute-care.md](sepsis-acute-care.md) |
| **Orders & Results** | lab order, radiology, ORM, ORU, results | [orders-results.md](orders-results.md) |
| **Maternal Health** | pregnancy, prenatal, obstetric, labor, delivery, postpartum, GDM, preeclampsia | [maternal-health.md](maternal-health.md) |
| **Pediatrics** | | |
| ↳ Childhood Asthma | asthma, pediatric, inhaler, albuterol, nebulizer, wheeze | [pediatrics/childhood-asthma.md](pediatrics/childhood-asthma.md) |
| ↳ Acute Otitis Media | ear infection, otitis media, AOM, ear pain, amoxicillin pediatric | [pediatrics/acute-otitis-media.md](pediatrics/acute-otitis-media.md) |
| **Oncology** | | |
| ↳ Breast Cancer | breast cancer, mastectomy, ER positive, HER2, tamoxifen | [oncology/breast-cancer.md](oncology/breast-cancer.md) |
| ↳ Lung Cancer | lung cancer, NSCLC, EGFR, ALK, immunotherapy | [oncology/lung-cancer.md](oncology/lung-cancer.md) |
| ↳ Colorectal Cancer | colon cancer, rectal cancer, FOLFOX, colonoscopy | [oncology/colorectal-cancer.md](oncology/colorectal-cancer.md) |

## Generation Parameters

| Parameter | Type | Default | Description |
|-----------|------|---------|-------------|
| age | int or range | 18-90 | Patient age or range |
| gender | M/F/O/U | weighted | M=49%, F=51% |
| conditions | list | none | Specific diagnoses to include |
| severity | string | moderate | mild, moderate, severe |
| encounters | int | 1 | Number of encounters to generate |
| timeline | string | 1 year | How far back to generate history |

## Output Entities

### Patient
Demographics extending the Person model with MRN.

### Encounter
Clinical visit with class (I/O/E/U/OBS), timing, location, providers.

### Diagnosis
ICD-10-CM code with type (admitting, working, final), dates.

### Medication
Drug with RxNorm code, dose, route, frequency, status.

### LabResult
Test with LOINC code, value, units, reference range, abnormal flag.

### VitalSign
Observation with temperature, HR, RR, BP, SpO2, height, weight.

See [data-models.md](../../references/data-models.md) for complete schemas.

## Clinical Coherence Rules

PatientSim ensures generated data is clinically realistic:

1. **Age-appropriate conditions**: No pediatric conditions in adults, geriatric conditions require appropriate age
2. **Gender-appropriate conditions**: Prostate conditions for males only, pregnancy for females only
3. **Medication indications**: Drugs match diagnoses (metformin requires diabetes)
4. **Lab coherence**: Values align with conditions (elevated A1C with diabetes)
5. **Temporal consistency**: Diagnoses before treatments, labs after orders

See [validation-rules.md](../../references/validation-rules.md) for complete rules.

## Output Formats

| Format | Request | Use Case |
|--------|---------|----------|
| JSON | default | API testing |
| FHIR R4 | "as FHIR", "FHIR bundle" | Interoperability |
| HL7v2 ADT | "as HL7", "ADT message" | Legacy EMR |
| CSV | "as CSV" | Analytics |

## Data Integration (PopulationSim v2.0)

PatientSim integrates with PopulationSim's embedded data package to generate patients grounded in real demographic and health data.

### Enabling Data-Driven Generation

Add a `geography` parameter to any request to enable data-driven generation:

| Parameter | Type | Example | Description |
|-----------|------|---------|-------------|
| geography | string | "48201" | 5-digit county FIPS code |
| geography | string | "48201002300" | 11-digit census tract FIPS code |

**Example request:**
```
Generate a diabetic patient in Harris County, TX (geography: 48201)
```

### What Data-Driven Generation Provides

When geography is specified, PatientSim uses real population data:

1. **Demographics**: Age, sex, race/ethnicity distributions match real population
2. **Condition Prevalence**: Diabetes, obesity, hypertension rates from CDC PLACES
3. **SDOH Context**: SVI vulnerability scores affect adherence and outcomes
4. **Comorbidity Rates**: Realistic co-occurrence based on area health profile

### Embedded Data Sources

| Source | File | Coverage | Use |
|--------|------|----------|-----|
| CDC PLACES 2024 | `populationsim/data/county/places_county_2024.csv` | 3,144 counties | Health indicators (40 measures) |
| CDC PLACES 2024 | `populationsim/data/tract/places_tract_2024.csv` | 84,000 tracts | Neighborhood-level health |
| CDC SVI 2022 | `populationsim/data/county/svi_county_2022.csv` | 3,144 counties | Social vulnerability |
| CDC SVI 2022 | `populationsim/data/tract/svi_tract_2022.csv` | 84,000 tracts | Tract vulnerability |
| ADI 2023 | `populationsim/data/block_group/adi_blockgroup_2023.csv` | 242,000 block groups | Area deprivation |

### Provenance Tracking

Data-driven generation includes provenance in output metadata:

```json
{
  "patient": { ... },
  "metadata": {
    "generation_mode": "data_driven",
    "geography": {
      "fips": "48201",
      "name": "Harris County, TX",
      "level": "county"
    },
    "data_provenance": [
      {
        "source": "CDC_PLACES_2024",
        "data_year": 2022,
        "file": "populationsim/data/county/places_county_2024.csv",
        "fields_used": ["DIABETES_CrudePrev", "OBESITY_CrudePrev", "BPHIGH_CrudePrev"]
      },
      {
        "source": "CDC_SVI_2022",
        "data_year": 2022,
        "file": "populationsim/data/county/svi_county_2022.csv",
        "fields_used": ["RPL_THEMES", "EP_UNINSUR"]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

### Foundation Skill

For detailed data integration patterns, see [data-integration.md](data-integration.md).

For complete mapping specification, see [PopulationSim → PatientSim Integration](../populationsim/integration/patientsim-integration.md).

## Examples

### Example 1: Basic Patient with Encounter

**Request:** "Generate a 45-year-old male with an office visit for hypertension"

**Output:**
```json
{
  "patient": {
    "mrn": "MRN00000001",
    "name": { "given_name": "Michael", "family_name": "Johnson" },
    "birth_date": "1980-06-22",
    "gender": "M"
  },
  "encounter": {
    "encounter_id": "ENC0000000001",
    "patient_mrn": "MRN00000001",
    "class_code": "O",
    "status": "finished",
    "admission_time": "2025-01-15T09:30:00",
    "discharge_time": "2025-01-15T10:00:00",
    "chief_complaint": "Blood pressure follow-up"
  },
  "diagnoses": [
    {
      "code": "I10",
      "description": "Essential hypertension",
      "type": "final",
      "diagnosed_date": "2024-06-15"
    }
  ],
  "medications": [
    {
      "name": "Lisinopril",
      "code": "104376",
      "dose": "10 mg",
      "route": "PO",
      "frequency": "QD",
      "status": "active"
    }
  ],
  "vitals": {
    "observation_time": "2025-01-15T09:35:00",
    "systolic_bp": 138,
    "diastolic_bp": 88,
    "heart_rate": 72,
    "temperature": 98.4,
    "spo2": 98
  }
}
```

### Example 2: Complex Multi-Condition Patient

**Request:** "Generate a 68-year-old female with diabetes, hypertension, and CKD stage 3"

Claude combines patterns from multiple scenario skills to generate a coherent patient with:
- Multiple chronic diagnoses with appropriate onset dates
- Medications for each condition (metformin, lisinopril, etc.)
- Quarterly encounters over 2 years
- Labs showing disease progression (A1C, eGFR trends)
- Comorbidity interactions (CKD affecting medication choices)

## Related Skills

### Chronic Disease
- [diabetes-management.md](diabetes-management.md) - Diabetes scenarios
- [heart-failure.md](heart-failure.md) - Heart failure scenarios
- [chronic-kidney-disease.md](chronic-kidney-disease.md) - CKD scenarios

### Behavioral Health

- [behavioral-health.md](behavioral-health.md) - Depression, anxiety, bipolar, PTSD, substance use

### Acute Care
- [adt-workflow.md](adt-workflow.md) - ADT workflow scenarios
- [sepsis-acute-care.md](sepsis-acute-care.md) - Acute care scenarios
- [orders-results.md](orders-results.md) - Orders and results

### Pediatrics

- [pediatrics/childhood-asthma.md](pediatrics/childhood-asthma.md) - Pediatric asthma scenarios
- [pediatrics/acute-otitis-media.md](pediatrics/acute-otitis-media.md) - Ear infection scenarios

### Oncology
- [oncology-domain.md](../../references/oncology-domain.md) - Foundational oncology knowledge
- [oncology/breast-cancer.md](oncology/breast-cancer.md) - Breast cancer scenarios
- [oncology/lung-cancer.md](oncology/lung-cancer.md) - Lung cancer scenarios (NSCLC/SCLC)
- [oncology/colorectal-cancer.md](oncology/colorectal-cancer.md) - Colorectal cancer scenarios

### Cross-Product: MemberSim (Claims)

PatientSim clinical encounters generate corresponding claims in MemberSim:

| PatientSim Scenario | MemberSim Skill | Typical Timing |
|---------------------|-----------------|----------------|
| Office visits | [professional-claims.md](../membersim/professional-claims.md) | Same day |
| Inpatient stays | [facility-claims.md](../membersim/facility-claims.md) | +2-14 days |
| Surgeries | [prior-authorization.md](../membersim/prior-authorization.md), [facility-claims.md](../membersim/facility-claims.md) | PA before, claim after |
| Behavioral health | [behavioral-health.md](../membersim/behavioral-health.md) | Same day |

> **Integration Pattern:** Generate clinical encounter in PatientSim first, then use MemberSim to create corresponding claims with matching dates, diagnoses, and procedures.

### Cross-Product: RxMemberSim (Pharmacy)

PatientSim medication orders generate prescription fills in RxMemberSim:

| PatientSim Scenario | RxMemberSim Skill | Typical Timing |
|---------------------|-------------------|----------------|
| Chronic disease meds | [retail-pharmacy.md](../rxmembersim/retail-pharmacy.md) | Same day or +1-3 days |
| Discharge meds | [retail-pharmacy.md](../rxmembersim/retail-pharmacy.md) | +0-3 days post-discharge |
| Specialty drugs | [specialty-pharmacy.md](../rxmembersim/specialty-pharmacy.md) | +1-7 days |
| High-cost drugs | [rx-prior-auth.md](../rxmembersim/rx-prior-auth.md) | PA required first |

> **Integration Pattern:** Generate medication orders in PatientSim, then use RxMemberSim to model pharmacy fills with matching NDCs and appropriate fill timing.

### Cross-Product: PopulationSim (Demographics & SDOH) - v2.0 Data Integration

PopulationSim v2.0 provides **embedded real-world data** for statistically accurate patient generation. When a geography is specified, PatientSim uses actual CDC PLACES, SVI, and ADI data to ground demographics and health patterns.

#### Data-Driven Generation Pattern

**Step 1: Look up real population data**
```
# For Harris County, TX (FIPS: 48201)
Read from: skills/populationsim/data/county/places_county_2024.csv
→ DIABETES_CrudePrev: 12.1%
→ OBESITY_CrudePrev: 32.8%
→ BPHIGH_CrudePrev: 32.4%
→ TotalPopulation: 4,731,145

Read from: skills/populationsim/data/county/svi_county_2022.csv
→ RPL_THEMES (overall SVI): 0.68
→ EP_POV150: 22.3% (below 150% poverty)
→ EP_MINRTY: 72.1% (minority percentage)
```

**Step 2: Apply rates to patient generation**
```json
{
  "cohort_parameters": {
    "geography": { "county_fips": "48201", "name": "Harris County, TX" },
    "condition_weights": {
      "diabetes": 0.121,
      "obesity": 0.328,
      "hypertension": 0.324
    },
    "demographic_distribution": {
      "minority_percentage": 0.721,
      "poverty_percentage": 0.223
    },
    "sdoh_context": {
      "svi_overall": 0.68,
      "vulnerability_category": "high"
    },
    "data_provenance": {
      "source": "CDC_PLACES_2024",
      "data_year": 2022
    }
  }
}
```

**Step 3: Generate patients matching real rates**
- Assign diabetes to ~12.1% of patients (not generic 10%)
- Weight demographics toward 72% minority representation
- Apply SDOH factors consistent with SVI 0.68

#### PopulationSim Data Files

| Dataset | File | Key Measures | Use Case |
|---------|------|--------------|----------|
| CDC PLACES County | `populationsim/data/county/places_county_2024.csv` | 40 health measures | Condition prevalence by county |
| CDC PLACES Tract | `populationsim/data/tract/places_tract_2024.csv` | 40 health measures | Neighborhood-level health |
| SVI County | `populationsim/data/county/svi_county_2022.csv` | 16 vulnerability vars | County SDOH context |
| SVI Tract | `populationsim/data/tract/svi_tract_2022.csv` | 16 vulnerability vars | Tract SDOH context |
| ADI Block Group | `populationsim/data/block_group/adi_blockgroup_2023.csv` | National/state ADI | Deprivation scoring |

#### Integration Skills

| PopulationSim Skill | PatientSim Application | Data Source |
|---------------------|------------------------|-------------|
| [data-lookup.md](../populationsim/data-access/data-lookup.md) | Exact prevalence rates | CDC PLACES 2024 |
| [county-profile.md](../populationsim/geographic/county-profile.md) | County demographics, health patterns | PLACES + SVI |
| [census-tract-analysis.md](../populationsim/geographic/census-tract-analysis.md) | Neighborhood health context | Tract PLACES + SVI |
| [svi-analysis.md](../populationsim/sdoh/svi-analysis.md) | Social vulnerability factors | CDC SVI 2022 |
| [adi-analysis.md](../populationsim/sdoh/adi-analysis.md) | Area deprivation | ADI 2023 |
| [cohort-specification.md](../populationsim/cohorts/cohort-specification.md) | Data-driven cohort definition | All sources |

#### Example: Data-Grounded Patient Generation

**Request:** "Generate 50 diabetic patients for Harris County, TX"

**Process:**
1. **Data Lookup**: Read Harris County from `places_county_2024.csv`
   - Diabetes: 12.1% (used to weight comorbidities)
   - Obesity: 32.8%, Hypertension: 32.4%, CKD: 3.2%
   
2. **SVI Context**: Read from `svi_county_2022.csv`
   - Overall SVI: 0.68 (high vulnerability)
   - Poverty: 22.3%, Uninsured: 18.1%
   
3. **Patient Generation**: Apply real rates
   - ~85% of diabetics have obesity (county rate 32.8% baseline)
   - ~75% have hypertension (county rate 32.4% baseline)
   - SDOH factors reflect high vulnerability (transportation barriers, food insecurity)

4. **Output with Provenance**:
```json
{
  "patient": { "mrn": "MRN00000001", "...": "..." },
  "generation_context": {
    "geography": "Harris County, TX (48201)",
    "data_sources": ["CDC_PLACES_2024", "CDC_SVI_2022"],
    "condition_rates_applied": {
      "diabetes": { "rate": 0.121, "source": "places_county_2024.csv" }
    }
  }
}
```

> **Key Principle:** When geography is specified, always ground generation in real PopulationSim data. Never use generic national averages when local data is available.

### Cross-Product: TrialSim (Clinical Trials)

For patients enrolled in clinical trials:

- [../trialsim/therapeutic-areas/oncology.md](../trialsim/therapeutic-areas/oncology.md) - Oncology trial endpoints
- [../trialsim/therapeutic-areas/cardiovascular.md](../trialsim/therapeutic-areas/cardiovascular.md) - CV outcomes trials
- [../trialsim/therapeutic-areas/cns.md](../trialsim/therapeutic-areas/cns.md) - CNS trial assessments

> **Integration Pattern:** Use PatientSim for clinical care journeys. When a patient enrolls in a trial, apply TrialSim skills for trial-specific data (RECIST, SDTM format, randomization).

### Output Formats
- [../../formats/fhir-r4.md](../../formats/fhir-r4.md) - FHIR transformation
- [../../formats/hl7v2-adt.md](../../formats/hl7v2-adt.md) - HL7v2 ADT messages
- [../../formats/hl7v2-orm.md](../../formats/hl7v2-orm.md) - HL7v2 Order messages
- [../../formats/hl7v2-oru.md](../../formats/hl7v2-oru.md) - HL7v2 Results messages

### Reference Data
- [../../references/oncology/](../../references/oncology/) - Oncology codes, medications, regimens

Commit message:

[NetworkSim] Post-implementation validation and polish
- Updated root README.md: NetworkSim status changed from 'planned' to active
- Added NetworkSim cross-product section to PatientSim, MemberSim, RxMemberSim SKILL.md files
- Added .claude/CLAUDE.md workspace instructions
- All 476 tests passing
- Verified all cross-product references in place across ecosystem

skills/patientsim/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: healthsim-patientsim
description: "Generate realistic clinical patient data including demographics, encounters, diagnoses, medications, labs, and vitals. Use when user requests: (1) patient records or clinical data, (2) EMR test data, (3) specific clinical scenarios like diabetes or heart failure, (4) HL7v2 or FHIR patient resources."
---

# PatientSim - Clinical Patient Data Generation

## For Claude

Use this skill when the user requests clinical patient data, EMR/EHR test data, or medical records. This is the primary skill for generating realistic synthetic patients with complete clinical histories.

**When to apply this skill:**

- User mentions patients, clinical data, or medical records
- User requests EMR or EHR test data
- User specifies clinical scenarios (diabetes, heart failure, oncology, etc.)
- User asks for HL7v2 messages, FHIR resources, or C-CDA documents
- User needs encounters, diagnoses, medications, labs, or vitals

**Key capabilities:**

- Generate patients with realistic demographics and identifiers
- Create encounters across care settings (inpatient, outpatient, ED, observation)
- Apply clinical scenarios from specialized skills (diabetes, oncology, etc.)
- Produce appropriately coded data (ICD-10, CPT, LOINC, RxNorm)
- Transform output to healthcare standards (FHIR R4, HL7v2, C-CDA)

For specific clinical scenarios, load the appropriate scenario skill from the table below.

## Overview

PatientSim generates realistic synthetic clinical data for EMR/EHR testing, including:
- Patient demographics
- Encounters (inpatient, outpatient, emergency, observation)
- Diagnoses (ICD-10-CM)
- Procedures (CPT, ICD-10-PCS)
- Medications (with RxNorm codes)
- Lab results (with LOINC codes)
- Vital signs

## Quick Start

### Simple Patient

**Request:** "Generate a patient"

```json
{
  "mrn": "MRN00000001",
  "name": { "given_name": "John", "family_name": "Smith" },
  "birth_date": "1975-03-15",
  "gender": "M",
  "address": {
    "street_address": "123 Main Street",
    "city": "Springfield",
    "state": "IL",
    "postal_code": "62701"
  }
}
```

### Clinical Scenario

**Request:** "Generate a diabetic patient with complications"

Claude loads [diabetes-management.md](diabetes-management.md) and produces a complete clinical picture.

## Scenario Skills

Load the appropriate scenario based on user request:

| Scenario | Trigger Phrases | File |
|----------|-----------------|------|
| **ADT Workflow** | admission, discharge, transfer, ADT, patient movement | [adt-workflow.md](adt-workflow.md) |
| **Behavioral Health** | depression, anxiety, bipolar, PTSD, mental health, psychiatric, substance use, PHQ-9, GAD-7 | [behavioral-health.md](behavioral-health.md) |
| **Diabetes Management** | diabetes, A1C, glucose, metformin, insulin | [diabetes-management.md](diabetes-management.md) |
| **Heart Failure** | CHF, HFrEF, HFpEF, BNP, ejection fraction | [heart-failure.md](heart-failure.md) |
| **Chronic Kidney Disease** | CKD, eGFR, dialysis, nephropathy | [chronic-kidney-disease.md](chronic-kidney-disease.md) |
| **Sepsis/Acute Care** | sepsis, infection, ICU, critical care | [sepsis-acute-care.md](sepsis-acute-care.md) |
| **Orders & Results** | lab order, radiology, ORM, ORU, results | [orders-results.md](orders-results.md) |
| **Maternal Health** | pregnancy, prenatal, obstetric, labor, delivery, postpartum, GDM, preeclampsia | [maternal-health.md](maternal-health.md) |
| **Pediatrics** | | |
| ↳ Childhood Asthma | asthma, pediatric, inhaler, albuterol, nebulizer, wheeze | [pediatrics/childhood-asthma.md](pediatrics/childhood-asthma.md) |
| ↳ Acute Otitis Media | ear infection, otitis media, AOM, ear pain, amoxicillin pediatric | [pediatrics/acute-otitis-media.md](pediatrics/acute-otitis-media.md) |
| **Oncology** | | |
| ↳ Breast Cancer | breast cancer, mastectomy, ER positive, HER2, tamoxifen | [oncology/breast-cancer.md](oncology/breast-cancer.md) |
| ↳ Lung Cancer | lung cancer, NSCLC, EGFR, ALK, immunotherapy | [oncology/lung-cancer.md](oncology/lung-cancer.md) |
| ↳ Colorectal Cancer | colon cancer, rectal cancer, FOLFOX, colonoscopy | [oncology/colorectal-cancer.md](oncology/colorectal-cancer.md) |

## Generation Parameters

| Parameter | Type | Default | Description |
|-----------|------|---------|-------------|
| age | int or range | 18-90 | Patient age or range |
| gender | M/F/O/U | weighted | M=49%, F=51% |
| conditions | list | none | Specific diagnoses to include |
| severity | string | moderate | mild, moderate, severe |
| encounters | int | 1 | Number of encounters to generate |
| timeline | string | 1 year | How far back to generate history |

## Output Entities

### Patient
Demographics extending the Person model with MRN.

### Encounter
Clinical visit with class (I/O/E/U/OBS), timing, location, providers.

### Diagnosis
ICD-10-CM code with type (admitting, working, final), dates.

### Medication
Drug with RxNorm code, dose, route, frequency, status.

### LabResult
Test with LOINC code, value, units, reference range, abnormal flag.

### VitalSign
Observation with temperature, HR, RR, BP, SpO2, height, weight.

See [data-models.md](../../references/data-models.md) for complete schemas.

## Clinical Coherence Rules

PatientSim ensures generated data is clinically realistic:

1. **Age-appropriate conditions**: No pediatric conditions in adults, geriatric conditions require appropriate age
2. **Gender-appropriate conditions**: Prostate conditions for males only, pregnancy for females only
3. **Medication indications**: Drugs match diagnoses (metformin requires diabetes)
4. **Lab coherence**: Values align with conditions (elevated A1C with diabetes)
5. **Temporal consistency**: Diagnoses before treatments, labs after orders

See [validation-rules.md](../../references/validation-rules.md) for complete rules.

## Output Formats

| Format | Request | Use Case |
|--------|---------|----------|
| JSON | default | API testing |
| FHIR R4 | "as FHIR", "FHIR bundle" | Interoperability |
| HL7v2 ADT | "as HL7", "ADT message" | Legacy EMR |
| CSV | "as CSV" | Analytics |

## Data Integration (PopulationSim v2.0)

PatientSim integrates with PopulationSim's embedded data package to generate patients grounded in real demographic and health data.

### Enabling Data-Driven Generation

Add a `geography` parameter to any request to enable data-driven generation:

| Parameter | Type | Example | Description |
|-----------|------|---------|-------------|
| geography | string | "48201" | 5-digit county FIPS code |
| geography | string | "48201002300" | 11-digit census tract FIPS code |

**Example request:**
```
Generate a diabetic patient in Harris County, TX (geography: 48201)
```

### What Data-Driven Generation Provides

When geography is specified, PatientSim uses real population data:

1. **Demographics**: Age, sex, race/ethnicity distributions match real population
2. **Condition Prevalence**: Diabetes, obesity, hypertension rates from CDC PLACES
3. **SDOH Context**: SVI vulnerability scores affect adherence and outcomes
4. **Comorbidity Rates**: Realistic co-occurrence based on area health profile

### Embedded Data Sources

| Source | File | Coverage | Use |
|--------|------|----------|-----|
| CDC PLACES 2024 | `populationsim/data/county/places_county_2024.csv` | 3,144 counties | Health indicators (40 measures) |
| CDC PLACES 2024 | `populationsim/data/tract/places_tract_2024.csv` | 84,000 tracts | Neighborhood-level health |
| CDC SVI 2022 | `populationsim/data/county/svi_county_2022.csv` | 3,144 counties | Social vulnerability |
| CDC SVI 2022 | `populationsim/data/tract/svi_tract_2022.csv` | 84,000 tracts | Tract vulnerability |
| ADI 2023 | `populationsim/data/block_group/adi_blockgroup_2023.csv` | 242,000 block groups | Area deprivation |

### Provenance Tracking

Data-driven generation includes provenance in output metadata:

```json
{
  "patient": { ... },
  "metadata": {
    "generation_mode": "data_driven",
    "geography": {
      "fips": "48201",
      "name": "Harris County, TX",
      "level": "county"
    },
    "data_provenance": [
      {
        "source": "CDC_PLACES_2024",
        "data_year": 2022,
        "file": "populationsim/data/county/places_county_2024.csv",
        "fields_used": ["DIABETES_CrudePrev", "OBESITY_CrudePrev", "BPHIGH_CrudePrev"]
      },
      {
        "source": "CDC_SVI_2022",
        "data_year": 2022,
        "file": "populationsim/data/county/svi_county_2022.csv",
        "fields_used": ["RPL_THEMES", "EP_UNINSUR"]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

### Foundation Skill

For detailed data integration patterns, see [data-integration.md](data-integration.md).

For complete mapping specification, see [PopulationSim → PatientSim Integration](../populationsim/integration/patientsim-integration.md).

## Examples

### Example 1: Basic Patient with Encounter

**Request:** "Generate a 45-year-old male with an office visit for hypertension"

**Output:**
```json
{
  "patient": {
    "mrn": "MRN00000001",
    "name": { "given_name": "Michael", "family_name": "Johnson" },
    "birth_date": "1980-06-22",
    "gender": "M"
  },
  "encounter": {
    "encounter_id": "ENC0000000001",
    "patient_mrn": "MRN00000001",
    "class_code": "O",
    "status": "finished",
    "admission_time": "2025-01-15T09:30:00",
    "discharge_time": "2025-01-15T10:00:00",
    "chief_complaint": "Blood pressure follow-up"
  },
  "diagnoses": [
    {
      "code": "I10",
      "description": "Essential hypertension",
      "type": "final",
      "diagnosed_date": "2024-06-15"
    }
  ],
  "medications": [
    {
      "name": "Lisinopril",
      "code": "104376",
      "dose": "10 mg",
      "route": "PO",
      "frequency": "QD",
      "status": "active"
    }
  ],
  "vitals": {
    "observation_time": "2025-01-15T09:35:00",
    "systolic_bp": 138,
    "diastolic_bp": 88,
    "heart_rate": 72,
    "temperature": 98.4,
    "spo2": 98
  }
}
```

### Example 2: Complex Multi-Condition Patient

**Request:** "Generate a 68-year-old female with diabetes, hypertension, and CKD stage 3"

Claude combines patterns from multiple scenario skills to generate a coherent patient with:
- Multiple chronic diagnoses with appropriate onset dates
- Medications for each condition (metformin, lisinopril, etc.)
- Quarterly encounters over 2 years
- Labs showing disease progression (A1C, eGFR trends)
- Comorbidity interactions (CKD affecting medication choices)

## Related Skills

### Chronic Disease
- [diabetes-management.md](diabetes-management.md) - Diabetes scenarios
- [heart-failure.md](heart-failure.md) - Heart failure scenarios
- [chronic-kidney-disease.md](chronic-kidney-disease.md) - CKD scenarios

### Behavioral Health

- [behavioral-health.md](behavioral-health.md) - Depression, anxiety, bipolar, PTSD, substance use

### Acute Care
- [adt-workflow.md](adt-workflow.md) - ADT workflow scenarios
- [sepsis-acute-care.md](sepsis-acute-care.md) - Acute care scenarios
- [orders-results.md](orders-results.md) - Orders and results

### Pediatrics

- [pediatrics/childhood-asthma.md](pediatrics/childhood-asthma.md) - Pediatric asthma scenarios
- [pediatrics/acute-otitis-media.md](pediatrics/acute-otitis-media.md) - Ear infection scenarios

### Oncology
- [oncology-domain.md](../../references/oncology-domain.md) - Foundational oncology knowledge
- [oncology/breast-cancer.md](oncology/breast-cancer.md) - Breast cancer scenarios
- [oncology/lung-cancer.md](oncology/lung-cancer.md) - Lung cancer scenarios (NSCLC/SCLC)
- [oncology/colorectal-cancer.md](oncology/colorectal-cancer.md) - Colorectal cancer scenarios

### Cross-Product: MemberSim (Claims)

PatientSim clinical encounters generate corresponding claims in MemberSim:

| PatientSim Scenario | MemberSim Skill | Typical Timing |
|---------------------|-----------------|----------------|
| Office visits | [professional-claims.md](../membersim/professional-claims.md) | Same day |
| Inpatient stays | [facility-claims.md](../membersim/facility-claims.md) | +2-14 days |
| Surgeries | [prior-authorization.md](../membersim/prior-authorization.md), [facility-claims.md](../membersim/facility-claims.md) | PA before, claim after |
| Behavioral health | [behavioral-health.md](../membersim/behavioral-health.md) | Same day |

> **Integration Pattern:** Generate clinical encounter in PatientSim first, then use MemberSim to create corresponding claims with matching dates, diagnoses, and procedures.

### Cross-Product: RxMemberSim (Pharmacy)

PatientSim medication orders generate prescription fills in RxMemberSim:

| PatientSim Scenario | RxMemberSim Skill | Typical Timing |
|---------------------|-------------------|----------------|
| Chronic disease meds | [retail-pharmacy.md](../rxmembersim/retail-pharmacy.md) | Same day or +1-3 days |
| Discharge meds | [retail-pharmacy.md](../rxmembersim/retail-pharmacy.md) | +0-3 days post-discharge |
| Specialty drugs | [specialty-pharmacy.md](../rxmembersim/specialty-pharmacy.md) | +1-7 days |
| High-cost drugs | [rx-prior-auth.md](../rxmembersim/rx-prior-auth.md) | PA required first |

> **Integration Pattern:** Generate medication orders in PatientSim, then use RxMemberSim to model pharmacy fills with matching NDCs and appropriate fill timing.

### Cross-Product: PopulationSim (Demographics & SDOH) - v2.0 Data Integration

PopulationSim v2.0 provides **embedded real-world data** for statistically accurate patient generation. When a geography is specified, PatientSim uses actual CDC PLACES, SVI, and ADI data to ground demographics and health patterns.

#### Data-Driven Generation Pattern

**Step 1: Look up real population data**
```
# For Harris County, TX (FIPS: 48201)
Read from: skills/populationsim/data/county/places_county_2024.csv
→ DIABETES_CrudePrev: 12.1%
→ OBESITY_CrudePrev: 32.8%
→ BPHIGH_CrudePrev: 32.4%
→ TotalPopulation: 4,731,145

Read from: skills/populationsim/data/county/svi_county_2022.csv
→ RPL_THEMES (overall SVI): 0.68
→ EP_POV150: 22.3% (below 150% poverty)
→ EP_MINRTY: 72.1% (minority percentage)
```

**Step 2: Apply rates to patient generation**
```json
{
  "cohort_parameters": {
    "geography": { "county_fips": "48201", "name": "Harris County, TX" },
    "condition_weights": {
      "diabetes": 0.121,
      "obesity": 0.328,
      "hypertension": 0.324
    },
    "demographic_distribution": {
      "minority_percentage": 0.721,
      "poverty_percentage": 0.223
    },
    "sdoh_context": {
      "svi_overall": 0.68,
      "vulnerability_category": "high"
    },
    "data_provenance": {
      "source": "CDC_PLACES_2024",
      "data_year": 2022
    }
  }
}
```

**Step 3: Generate patients matching real rates**
- Assign diabetes to ~12.1% of patients (not generic 10%)
- Weight demographics toward 72% minority representation
- Apply SDOH factors consistent with SVI 0.68

#### PopulationSim Data Files

| Dataset | File | Key Measures | Use Case |
|---------|------|--------------|----------|
| CDC PLACES County | `populationsim/data/county/places_county_2024.csv` | 40 health measures | Condition prevalence by county |
| CDC PLACES Tract | `populationsim/data/tract/places_tract_2024.csv` | 40 health measures | Neighborhood-level health |
| SVI County | `populationsim/data/county/svi_county_2022.csv` | 16 vulnerability vars | County SDOH context |
| SVI Tract | `populationsim/data/tract/svi_tract_2022.csv` | 16 vulnerability vars | Tract SDOH context |
| ADI Block Group | `populationsim/data/block_group/adi_blockgroup_2023.csv` | National/state ADI | Deprivation scoring |

#### Integration Skills

| PopulationSim Skill | PatientSim Application | Data Source |
|---------------------|------------------------|-------------|
| [data-lookup.md](../populationsim/data-access/data-lookup.md) | Exact prevalence rates | CDC PLACES 2024 |
| [county-profile.md](../populationsim/geographic/county-profile.md) | County demographics, health patterns | PLACES + SVI |
| [census-tract-analysis.md](../populationsim/geographic/census-tract-analysis.md) | Neighborhood health context | Tract PLACES + SVI |
| [svi-analysis.md](../populationsim/sdoh/svi-analysis.md) | Social vulnerability factors | CDC SVI 2022 |
| [adi-analysis.md](../populationsim/sdoh/adi-analysis.md) | Area deprivation | ADI 2023 |
| [cohort-specification.md](../populationsim/cohorts/cohort-specification.md) | Data-driven cohort definition | All sources |

#### Example: Data-Grounded Patient Generation

**Request:** "Generate 50 diabetic patients for Harris County, TX"

**Process:**
1. **Data Lookup**: Read Harris County from `places_county_2024.csv`
   - Diabetes: 12.1% (used to weight comorbidities)
   - Obesity: 32.8%, Hypertension: 32.4%, CKD: 3.2%
   
2. **SVI Context**: Read from `svi_county_2022.csv`
   - Overall SVI: 0.68 (high vulnerability)
   - Poverty: 22.3%, Uninsured: 18.1%
   
3. **Patient Generation**: Apply real rates
   - ~85% of diabetics have obesity (county rate 32.8% baseline)
   - ~75% have hypertension (county rate 32.4% baseline)
   - SDOH factors reflect high vulnerability (transportation barriers, food insecurity)

4. **Output with Provenance**:
```json
{
  "patient": { "mrn": "MRN00000001", "...": "..." },
  "generation_context": {
    "geography": "Harris County, TX (48201)",
    "data_sources": ["CDC_PLACES_2024", "CDC_SVI_2022"],
    "condition_rates_applied": {
      "diabetes": { "rate": 0.121, "source": "places_county_2024.csv" }
    }
  }
}
```

> **Key Principle:** When geography is specified, always ground generation in real PopulationSim data. Never use generic national averages when local data is available.

### Cross-Product: NetworkSim (Provider Networks)

NetworkSim provides realistic provider and facility entities for clinical encounters:

| PatientSim Need | NetworkSim Skill | Generated Entity |
|-----------------|------------------|------------------|
| Attending physician | [provider-for-encounter.md](../networksim/integration/provider-for-encounter.md) | Provider with NPI, credentials |
| Hospital/facility | [synthetic-facility.md](../networksim/synthetic/synthetic-facility.md) | Facility with CCN |
| Specialty referral | [synthetic-provider.md](../networksim/synthetic/synthetic-provider.md) | Specialist with taxonomy |

> **Integration Pattern:** Generate encounters in PatientSim first, then use NetworkSim to add realistic provider entities with proper NPIs, credentials, and hospital affiliations.

### Cross-Product: TrialSim (Clinical Trials)

For patients enrolled in clinical trials:

- [../trialsim/therapeutic-areas/oncology.md](../trialsim/therapeutic-areas/oncology.md) - Oncology trial endpoints
- [../trialsim/therapeutic-areas/cardiovascular.md](../trialsim/therapeutic-areas/cardiovascular.md) - CV outcomes trials
- [../trialsim/therapeutic-areas/cns.md](../trialsim/therapeutic-areas/cns.md) - CNS trial assessments

> **Integration Pattern:** Use PatientSim for clinical care journeys. When a patient enrolls in a trial, apply TrialSim skills for trial-specific data (RECIST, SDTM format, randomization).

### Output Formats
- [../../formats/fhir-r4.md](../../formats/fhir-r4.md) - FHIR transformation
- [../../formats/hl7v2-adt.md](../../formats/hl7v2-adt.md) - HL7v2 ADT messages
- [../../formats/hl7v2-orm.md](../../formats/hl7v2-orm.md) - HL7v2 Order messages
- [../../formats/hl7v2-oru.md](../../formats/hl7v2-oru.md) - HL7v2 Results messages

### Reference Data
- [../../references/oncology/](../../references/oncology/) - Oncology codes, medications, regimens
