docs/data-architecture.md, before:

# HealthSim Data Architecture

## Overview

HealthSim uses DuckDB as its unified data store for:
- **State Management**: Scenario persistence and retrieval
- **Reference Data**: PopulationSim demographic datasets
- **Analytics** (Phase 2): Star schema for OHDSI-style analysis

## Database Location

```
~/.healthsim/healthsim.duckdb
```

The database is created automatically on first use. A separate test database is used during testing to isolate test data from production scenarios.

---

## Schema Layers

### Layer 1: Canonical Data Model

Source of truth for all generated entities. Tables mirror the JSON canonical model.

| Table | Description | Source Product |
|-------|-------------|----------------|
| patients | Patient demographics | PatientSim |
| encounters | Visits, admissions | PatientSim |
| diagnoses | ICD-10 codes | PatientSim |
| procedures | CPT/ICD-PCS codes | PatientSim |
| medications | Active/historical meds | PatientSim |
| lab_results | Lab values | PatientSim |
| vital_signs | Vitals | PatientSim |
| clinical_notes | Notes/documents | PatientSim |
| members | Health plan members | MemberSim |
| claims | Claim headers | MemberSim |
| claim_lines | Claim line items | MemberSim |
| prescriptions | Rx fills | RxMemberSim |
| subjects | Trial subjects | TrialSim |
| trial_visits | Trial visit data | TrialSim |

### Layer 2: State Management

Organizes entities into named scenarios for save/load/share operations.

| Table | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| scenarios | Scenario metadata (name, description, timestamps) |
| scenario_entities | Links entities to scenarios (stores full entity JSON) |
| scenario_tags | Tag-based organization |

### Layer 3: Reference Data

Read-only datasets loaded from PopulationSim for generation support.

| Table | Source | Records | Coverage |
|-------|--------|---------|----------|
| ref_cdc_places_tract | CDC PLACES 2024 | ~85,000 | All US census tracts |
| ref_cdc_places_county | CDC PLACES 2024 | ~3,200 | All US counties |
| ref_svi_tract | SVI 2022 | ~85,000 | All US census tracts |
| ref_svi_county | SVI 2022 | ~3,200 | All US counties |
| ref_adi_blockgroup | ADI 2021 | ~242,000 | All US block groups |

---

## Reference Data Philosophy

HealthSim uses two different approaches for reference data, each chosen deliberately based on the data's nature and use case:

### Text Files (Skills-Based Reference Data)

**Location**: `references/` and `formats/` directories

**Examples**: Code systems (ICD-10, CPT, LOINC), format specifications (FHIR, X12, NCPDP), validation rules, clinical guidelines

**Why text files?**
- **Version controlled**: Changes are tracked in git, enabling history and collaboration
- **Human-readable**: Developers and domain experts can read and edit directly
- **Part of the conversation**: Claude reads these during generation to apply correct codes and rules
- **Small and focused**: Each file covers a specific domain (diabetes codes, heart failure meds)
- **No query overhead**: Direct file access during generation

### DuckDB (External Packaged Reference Data)

**Location**: `~/.healthsim/healthsim.duckdb` (ref_* tables)

**Examples**: CDC PLACES health indicators, Social Vulnerability Index, Area Deprivation Index, NPPES provider registry

**Why DuckDB?**
- **Large datasets**: Millions of records (85K census tracts, 9M providers) impossible to embed in skills
- **Real statistical data**: Actual prevalence rates, demographics, and geographic distributions
- **SQL queryable**: Complex aggregations, joins, and filtering for analytics
- **Compressed storage**: 5-7x smaller than source CSVs
- **Optional download**: Users can choose to download these datasets or skip them

### Decision Guide

| Characteristic | Use Text Files | Use DuckDB |
|----------------|----------------|------------|
| Size | < 1MB | > 1MB |
| Update frequency | Rarely (version controlled) | Periodically (external source) |
| Access pattern | Read during generation | Query for analysis |
| Source | Created/curated by HealthSim | External agency (CDC, CMS) |
| Required? | Yes (core functionality) | Optional (enhanced functionality) |

This hybrid approach keeps HealthSim's core lightweight and conversational while enabling powerful analytics when external data sources are available.

---

## Provenance Tracking

All canonical tables include provenance columns for traceability:

```sql
created_at          TIMESTAMP   -- When the entity was created
source_type         VARCHAR     -- 'generated', 'loaded', 'derived'
source_system       VARCHAR     -- 'patientsim', 'membersim', etc.
skill_used          VARCHAR     -- Skill that generated the entity
generation_seed     INTEGER     -- For reproducibility
```

---

## Querying

### Via HealthSim MCP Server (Recommended)

The `healthsim-mcp` server is the **recommended** way to query the database. It maintains the single connection and prevents file locking issues:

```
# List available tables
Use healthsim_tables

# Query reference data
Use healthsim_query_reference with table="places_county" and state="CA"

# Run custom SQL
Use healthsim_query with sql="SELECT * FROM patients LIMIT 10"
```

See [MCP Configuration](./mcp/configuration.md) for setup.

### Via Python (Use Carefully)

**Warning**: DuckDB uses file-level locking. If the MCP server is running, Python scripts cannot open the database for writing. Stop the MCP server first, or use read-only mode.

Direct SQL queries are supported via Python:

```sql
-- Find all diabetic patients in a scenario
SELECT p.* 
FROM patients p
JOIN scenario_entities se ON p.patient_id = se.entity_id
JOIN scenarios s ON se.scenario_id = s.scenario_id
WHERE s.name = 'diabetes-cohort'
  AND se.entity_type = 'patient';

-- Query reference data for population health indicators
SELECT 
    county_name,
    AVG(diabetes_crude_prev) as avg_diabetes_rate,
    AVG(obesity_crude_prev) as avg_obesity_rate
FROM ref_cdc_places_county 
WHERE state_abbr = 'CA'
GROUP BY county_name
ORDER BY avg_diabetes_rate DESC;

-- Cross-reference patient location with SDOH data
SELECT 
    p.patient_id,
    p.given_name,
    svi.rpl_themes as vulnerability_score
FROM patients p
JOIN ref_svi_tract svi ON p.census_tract = svi.fips
WHERE svi.rpl_themes > 0.75;
```

---

## Python API

### State Management

```python
from healthsim.state import save_scenario, load_scenario, list_scenarios

# Save a scenario
scenario_id = save_scenario(
    name='diabetes-cohort',
    entities={
        'patients': [patient1, patient2, ...],
        'encounters': [enc1, enc2, ...]
    },
    description='Type 2 Diabetes test cohort',
    tags=['diabetes', 'chronic', 'testing']
)

# Load a scenario
scenario = load_scenario('diabetes-cohort')
patients = scenario['entities']['patients']

# List scenarios by tag
scenarios = list_scenarios(tag='diabetes')
```

### JSON Export/Import

```python
from healthsim.state import export_scenario_to_json, import_scenario_from_json

# Export for sharing
path = export_scenario_to_json('diabetes-cohort')
# Creates ~/Downloads/diabetes-cohort.json

# Import from file
import_scenario_from_json(Path('shared-scenario.json'))
```

### Database Access

```python
from healthsim.db import get_connection

with get_connection() as conn:
    result = conn.execute("""
        SELECT COUNT(*) FROM ref_cdc_places_tract
        WHERE diabetes_crude_prev > 15
    """).fetchone()
    print(f"High diabetes prevalence tracts: {result[0]}")
```

---

## Migration from JSON

If you have existing JSON scenarios from before the DuckDB migration:

```bash
# Check migration status
python scripts/migrate_json_to_duckdb.py --status

# Dry run (preview only)
python scripts/migrate_json_to_duckdb.py --dry-run

# Execute migration (creates backup automatically)
python scripts/migrate_json_to_duckdb.py
```

The migration tool:
- Discovers scenarios in `~/.healthsim/scenarios/`
- Creates a backup at `~/.healthsim/scenarios_backup/`
- Imports each scenario to DuckDB
- Verifies migration success

See [Migration Guide](./state-management/migration.md) for details.

---

## Schema Versioning

Schema versions are tracked in a `schema_version` table:

```sql
SELECT * FROM schema_version;
-- version | applied_at
-- 1       | 2024-12-26 10:30:00
```

Migrations are applied automatically when the database is opened if the schema is outdated.

---

## Performance Characteristics

| Operation | Typical Performance |
|-----------|---------------------|
| Save scenario (100 entities) | < 100ms |
| Load scenario (100 entities) | < 50ms |
| List scenarios | < 10ms |
| Reference data query (indexed) | < 50ms |
| Full table scan (250K rows) | < 500ms |

DuckDB's columnar storage provides excellent compression:
- Reference data: 5-7x compression vs CSV
- Scenario data: 3-5x compression vs JSON

---

## Related Documentation

- [State Management Skill](../skills/common/state-management.md) - Conversational interface
- [State Management Specification](./state-management/specification.md) - MCP tool details
- [PopulationSim Skill](../skills/populationsim/SKILL.md) - Reference data usage
- [HEALTHSIM-ARCHITECTURE-GUIDE.md](./HEALTHSIM-ARCHITECTURE-GUIDE.md) - Overall architecture

Commit message:

[NetworkSim] Session 9 prep: comprehensive audit remediation
Expanded SKILL.md (269→511 lines):
- Added YAML frontmatter with trigger phrases
- Complete skill inventory (query/analytics/synthetic/integration/reference)
- Quick reference table with skill mapping
- Regulatory standards (CMS MA, NCQA, HRSA)
- Performance benchmarks
- Cross-product integration examples

Created missing sub-directory READMEs:
- skills/networksim/query/README.md
- skills/networksim/analytics/README.md
- skills/networksim/reference/README.md
- skills/networksim/synthetic/README.md

Fixed data documentation location:
- Created skills/networksim/data/README.md (consistent with PopulationSim)
- Updated scenarios/networksim/DATA-README.md to redirect

Improved test coverage:
- test_query_skills.py (302 lines) - provider/facility/pharmacy search
- test_analytics_skills.py (344 lines) - adequacy/desert analysis

Added NetworkSim reference models:
- references/networksim-models/provider-model.md
- references/networksim-models/facility-model.md
- references/networksim-models/pharmacy-model.md
- references/networksim-models/network-model.md
- references/networksim-models/plan-model.md

Updated data-architecture.md:
- Fixed database path (workspace root, not ~/.healthsim)

Housekeeping:
- Moved session summaries to archive/planning/
- Added gitignore for handoff documents
- Added saved scenarios and populationsim cross-product docs

docs/data-architecture.md, after:

# HealthSim Data Architecture

## Overview

HealthSim uses DuckDB as its unified data store for:
- **State Management**: Scenario persistence and retrieval
- **Reference Data**: PopulationSim demographic datasets
- **Analytics** (Phase 2): Star schema for OHDSI-style analysis

## Database Location

```
/path/to/healthsim-workspace/healthsim.duckdb
```

The database is located in the workspace root directory. This enables:
- **Version control awareness**: Database path relative to project
- **Cross-product integration**: Single database for all HealthSim products
- **MCP server access**: healthsim-mcp connects to workspace database

**Size**: ~1.7 GB (includes NetworkSim providers, PopulationSim demographics)

---

## Schema Layers

### Layer 1: Canonical Data Model

Source of truth for all generated entities. Tables mirror the JSON canonical model.

| Table | Description | Source Product |
|-------|-------------|----------------|
| patients | Patient demographics | PatientSim |
| encounters | Visits, admissions | PatientSim |
| diagnoses | ICD-10 codes | PatientSim |
| procedures | CPT/ICD-PCS codes | PatientSim |
| medications | Active/historical meds | PatientSim |
| lab_results | Lab values | PatientSim |
| vital_signs | Vitals | PatientSim |
| clinical_notes | Notes/documents | PatientSim |
| members | Health plan members | MemberSim |
| claims | Claim headers | MemberSim |
| claim_lines | Claim line items | MemberSim |
| prescriptions | Rx fills | RxMemberSim |
| subjects | Trial subjects | TrialSim |
| trial_visits | Trial visit data | TrialSim |

### Layer 2: State Management

Organizes entities into named scenarios for save/load/share operations.

| Table | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| scenarios | Scenario metadata (name, description, timestamps) |
| scenario_entities | Links entities to scenarios (stores full entity JSON) |
| scenario_tags | Tag-based organization |

### Layer 3: Reference Data

Read-only datasets loaded from PopulationSim for generation support.

| Table | Source | Records | Coverage |
|-------|--------|---------|----------|
| ref_cdc_places_tract | CDC PLACES 2024 | ~85,000 | All US census tracts |
| ref_cdc_places_county | CDC PLACES 2024 | ~3,200 | All US counties |
| ref_svi_tract | SVI 2022 | ~85,000 | All US census tracts |
| ref_svi_county | SVI 2022 | ~3,200 | All US counties |
| ref_adi_blockgroup | ADI 2021 | ~242,000 | All US block groups |

---

## Reference Data Philosophy

HealthSim uses two different approaches for reference data, each chosen deliberately based on the data's nature and use case:

### Text Files (Skills-Based Reference Data)

**Location**: `references/` and `formats/` directories

**Examples**: Code systems (ICD-10, CPT, LOINC), format specifications (FHIR, X12, NCPDP), validation rules, clinical guidelines

**Why text files?**
- **Version controlled**: Changes are tracked in git, enabling history and collaboration
- **Human-readable**: Developers and domain experts can read and edit directly
- **Part of the conversation**: Claude reads these during generation to apply correct codes and rules
- **Small and focused**: Each file covers a specific domain (diabetes codes, heart failure meds)
- **No query overhead**: Direct file access during generation

### DuckDB (External Packaged Reference Data)

**Location**: `healthsim.duckdb` (in workspace root, ref_* tables)

**Examples**: CDC PLACES health indicators, Social Vulnerability Index, Area Deprivation Index, NPPES provider registry

**Why DuckDB?**
- **Large datasets**: Millions of records (85K census tracts, 9M providers) impossible to embed in skills
- **Real statistical data**: Actual prevalence rates, demographics, and geographic distributions
- **SQL queryable**: Complex aggregations, joins, and filtering for analytics
- **Compressed storage**: 5-7x smaller than source CSVs
- **Optional download**: Users can choose to download these datasets or skip them

### Decision Guide

| Characteristic | Use Text Files | Use DuckDB |
|----------------|----------------|------------|
| Size | < 1MB | > 1MB |
| Update frequency | Rarely (version controlled) | Periodically (external source) |
| Access pattern | Read during generation | Query for analysis |
| Source | Created/curated by HealthSim | External agency (CDC, CMS) |
| Required? | Yes (core functionality) | Optional (enhanced functionality) |

This hybrid approach keeps HealthSim's core lightweight and conversational while enabling powerful analytics when external data sources are available.

---

## Provenance Tracking

All canonical tables include provenance columns for traceability:

```sql
created_at          TIMESTAMP   -- When the entity was created
source_type         VARCHAR     -- 'generated', 'loaded', 'derived'
source_system       VARCHAR     -- 'patientsim', 'membersim', etc.
skill_used          VARCHAR     -- Skill that generated the entity
generation_seed     INTEGER     -- For reproducibility
```

---

## Querying

### Via HealthSim MCP Server (Recommended)

The `healthsim-mcp` server is the **recommended** way to query the database. It maintains the single connection and prevents file locking issues:

```
# List available tables
Use healthsim_tables

# Query reference data
Use healthsim_query_reference with table="places_county" and state="CA"

# Run custom SQL
Use healthsim_query with sql="SELECT * FROM patients LIMIT 10"
```

See [MCP Configuration](./mcp/configuration.md) for setup.

### Via Python (Use Carefully)

**Warning**: DuckDB uses file-level locking. If the MCP server is running, Python scripts cannot open the database for writing. Stop the MCP server first, or use read-only mode.

Direct SQL queries are supported via Python:

```sql
-- Find all diabetic patients in a scenario
SELECT p.* 
FROM patients p
JOIN scenario_entities se ON p.patient_id = se.entity_id
JOIN scenarios s ON se.scenario_id = s.scenario_id
WHERE s.name = 'diabetes-cohort'
  AND se.entity_type = 'patient';

-- Query reference data for population health indicators
SELECT 
    county_name,
    AVG(diabetes_crude_prev) as avg_diabetes_rate,
    AVG(obesity_crude_prev) as avg_obesity_rate
FROM ref_cdc_places_county 
WHERE state_abbr = 'CA'
GROUP BY county_name
ORDER BY avg_diabetes_rate DESC;

-- Cross-reference patient location with SDOH data
SELECT 
    p.patient_id,
    p.given_name,
    svi.rpl_themes as vulnerability_score
FROM patients p
JOIN ref_svi_tract svi ON p.census_tract = svi.fips
WHERE svi.rpl_themes > 0.75;
```

---

## Python API

### State Management

```python
from healthsim.state import save_scenario, load_scenario, list_scenarios

# Save a scenario
scenario_id = save_scenario(
    name='diabetes-cohort',
    entities={
        'patients': [patient1, patient2, ...],
        'encounters': [enc1, enc2, ...]
    },
    description='Type 2 Diabetes test cohort',
    tags=['diabetes', 'chronic', 'testing']
)

# Load a scenario
scenario = load_scenario('diabetes-cohort')
patients = scenario['entities']['patients']

# List scenarios by tag
scenarios = list_scenarios(tag='diabetes')
```

### JSON Export/Import

```python
from healthsim.state import export_scenario_to_json, import_scenario_from_json

# Export for sharing
path = export_scenario_to_json('diabetes-cohort')
# Creates ~/Downloads/diabetes-cohort.json

# Import from file
import_scenario_from_json(Path('shared-scenario.json'))
```

### Database Access

```python
from healthsim.db import get_connection

with get_connection() as conn:
    result = conn.execute("""
        SELECT COUNT(*) FROM ref_cdc_places_tract
        WHERE diabetes_crude_prev > 15
    """).fetchone()
    print(f"High diabetes prevalence tracts: {result[0]}")
```

---

## Migration from JSON

If you have existing JSON scenarios from before the DuckDB migration:

```bash
# Check migration status
python scripts/migrate_json_to_duckdb.py --status

# Dry run (preview only)
python scripts/migrate_json_to_duckdb.py --dry-run

# Execute migration (creates backup automatically)
python scripts/migrate_json_to_duckdb.py
```

The migration tool:
- Discovers scenarios in `~/.healthsim/scenarios/`
- Creates a backup at `~/.healthsim/scenarios_backup/`
- Imports each scenario to DuckDB
- Verifies migration success

See [Migration Guide](./state-management/migration.md) for details.

---

## Schema Versioning

Schema versions are tracked in a `schema_version` table:

```sql
SELECT * FROM schema_version;
-- version | applied_at
-- 1       | 2024-12-26 10:30:00
```

Migrations are applied automatically when the database is opened if the schema is outdated.

---

## Performance Characteristics

| Operation | Typical Performance |
|-----------|---------------------|
| Save scenario (100 entities) | < 100ms |
| Load scenario (100 entities) | < 50ms |
| List scenarios | < 10ms |
| Reference data query (indexed) | < 50ms |
| Full table scan (250K rows) | < 500ms |

DuckDB's columnar storage provides excellent compression:
- Reference data: 5-7x compression vs CSV
- Scenario data: 3-5x compression vs JSON

---

## Related Documentation

- [State Management Skill](../skills/common/state-management.md) - Conversational interface
- [State Management Specification](./state-management/specification.md) - MCP tool details
- [PopulationSim Skill](../skills/populationsim/SKILL.md) - Reference data usage
- [HEALTHSIM-ARCHITECTURE-GUIDE.md](./HEALTHSIM-ARCHITECTURE-GUIDE.md) - Overall architecture
